EECS 482 syllabus
Contents
Introduction to Operating Systems FECS 482 Winter 2021) i ;
2.Course calendar
3. Course overview
4, Prerequisites
; . inf .

6. Course projects.
6.1 Group work

2 _—. :
6.3 Honor code

ips fi .
7. Exams
8. Online instruction
9. Grading
10. Computers
11 Semester schedule
Spec Theme Settings
Choose your theme!
Does the spec display incorrectly? Let us know by adding a new “issue” here,
Primer Spec v1.1.0
Introduction to Operating Systems
EECS 482 (Winter 2021)
1. Basic information
Professors: Peter Chen, Manos Kapritsos, Baris Kasikei
GSI and IAs: Tony Bai, Justin Beemer, Morgan Borjigin-Wang, Nathan Brown, Morgan Douglas, Louis Gouirand,
Brandon Kayes, Austin Kiekintveld, Audrey Ladd, Joseph Nwabueze, Matthew Polgar, Aditya Ravi, Jason Ross,
Thomas Smith, Vaughn Taylor, David Wang, Victoria Whall, Yuxi Xie
Web page: https://grader2.cecs.umich edu/eecs482
Discussion forum: https://piazza.com (signup)
To contact the staff, please post a private message on piazza.
2. Course calendar
EECS 482 syllabus. fitrnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18]


=== PAGE BREAK ===

EECS 482 syllabus
3. Course overview
EECS 482 is an introductory course on operating systems at the senior undergraduate or first-year graduate level.
The objective of the course is to teach the issues involved in the design and implementation of modern operating
systems. The concepts in this course are applicable to many operating systems and hardware platforms. We will
discuss examples that are drawn from historically significant and modern operating systems including MULTICS,
Unix, and Windows. We will cover topics such as processes and threads, concurrency and synchronization, CPU
scheduling, virtual memory management, communication in distributed systems, secondary-storage management,
and file systems.
To help you understand operating systems, you will implement several modules that form much of the core
functionality in modern operating systems. These projects will give you practical exposure to topics such as threads,
virtual memory management, client-server systems, and file systems. We will also assign homework questions that
will be covered in the lab sections.
We offer an optional supplemental course (EECS 498-002) for students concurrently enrolled in EECS 482.
Students in EECS 498-002 will complete advanced versions of the EECS 482 course projects, which will give
students more experience with concepts such as multiprocessors, inter-processor interrupts, address space
inheritance, copy-on-write memory sharing, dynamic lock management, and advanced locking techniques. Here are
the differences between the projects required for EECS 482 (core) and EECS 498-002 (advanced). Class meeting
times for EECS 498-002 will be structured as optional office hours for students enrolled in EECS 498-002.
4. Prerequisites
Students must have completed EECS 281 and EECS 370. Students should understand data structures and computer
architecture, have extensive C/C++ programming experience, and be familiar with UNIX.

EECS 482 syllabus.hnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

EECS 482 syllabus
5. Course materials and information
The recommended textbook for the course is Operating Systems: Principles and Practice (2nd edition), by Thomas
Anderson and Michael Dahlin (ISBN 0985673524). There will also be lecture notes and supplementary readings
posted on the course web page. Course announcements and project help will be posted on the discussion forum.
6. Course projects
Four projects will be assigned during the semester. Each project will require a substantial time commitment on your
part.
6.1 Group work
Three of the four projects in this course will be done in groups of 2-3 students (Project 1 is done individually).
Groups may be drawn from the entire EECS 482 population; members of a group need not all be in the same lecture
or lab section. Declare your group's membership by February 8, 2021. After this date, we will form groups from the
remaining students. Choose your group members carefully. You should discuss topics such as prior experience,
course background, goals for this course, workload and schedule for this semester, and preferred project
management and work style. Make sure you can find several blocks of time during the week to meet to discuss or
carry out the project. Students who have worked on any EECS 482 project in a past semester should talk with an
instructor before joining a group.
Students are expected to work diligently in their group for the benefit of the entire group. All group members should
be familiar with all aspects of each project, irrespective of their role on the project. We expect all group members to
contribute their fair share, and we expect to assign the same project grade to all members of a group. To help ensure
this, group members will evaluate the contributions of other group members after each project. Members who
contribute less than their share may receive a lower grade on the project; non-contributing members will receive a
zero. In case of disputes regarding contribution, an instructor may examine the commit log or interview group
members.
Students may be fired from a group by the majority vote of the remaining members. The procedure for this is as
follows: (1) documented "gentle warning" of risk of firing in e-mail, with cc to all group members and private
piazza post to instructors, with cause and specific work required to remain in group; (2) allow at least 72 hours for
compliance; (3) if the problems persist, e-mail statement of firing to the group and post privately to instructors via
piazza. Fired group members may join another group; students who cannot find a group must complete the
remaining projects by themselves.
Managing group dynamics and using each group member's time and talents effectively can be difficult. If there are
problems with your group, please see an instructor as soon as possible. Be open and candid with your group about
potential problems early on so your group can plan around those problems and not fall behind. A sure way to make
your group upset at you is not finishing your work at an agreed-upon deadline and not informing them about the
problems early enough for them to help. We encourage everyone to read Coping with hitchhikers and couch potatoes
on teams.
All projects will be hosted at github. Please sign up for a free github account if you don't already have one, then
register your github username with us. The eecs482 organization at github will provide a private repository for each
group for each project. Commits to the repository should reflect the proportion of work performed by each group
memer. If you use pair programming, take turns at the keyboard so that the commit log reflects the contributions of
both members.
6.2 Turning in projects
Sometimes unexpected events make it difficult to submit a project on time. For this reason, each group will have a
total of 3 late days to be used for projects throughout the semester. These late days should only be used to deal with
unexpected problems such as illness. They should not be used simply to start later on a project or because you are
having difficulty completing the project. Once late days are used up, submissions received after the due date will not
count (even if they are just one second late). Try to save some late days for the last project. Weekend days are
counted in the same way as weekdays (e.g., if the project deadline is Friday and you turn it in Sunday, that's two
EECS 482 syllabus.hnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

EECS 482 syllabus
days late).
To request an extension beyond the free late days, you must discuss your situation with an instructor before the
deadline and provide written documentation. Extensions will typically not be granted, even for computer problems,
illness, family emergencies, etc.. In most cases, with cooperation and good faith on your part, your group will be
able and expected to make up the deficit without needing an extension. You can avoid most problems by starting the
projects early and keeping backup files. If a family/personal emergency causes you to miss a significant number of
days, please see an instructor to decide the best course of action. If you are having trouble understanding the material
or starting a project, please come to office hours for help right away.
Contact an instructor at the beginning of the semester if you have a disability that might interfere with your ability to
participate in class, submit assignments, or take exams.
6.3 Honor code
All projects in this course are to be done by your own group and in accordance with the College of Engineering
Honor Code. Violation will result in a zero on the project in question and initiation of the formal procedures of the
: : C a
At the same time, we encourage students to help each other learn the course material. As in most courses, there is a
boundary separating these two situations. You may give or receive help on concepts covered in lecture or lab and on
the specifics of C++ syntax. You may consult with other students to help you understand the project specification
(i.e., the problem definition). However, you may not collaborate in any way when constructing your solution--the
solution to the project must be generated by your group working alone. Any misrepresentation of another person's
work as your own is unacceptable and is a violation of the honor code. You are not allowed to work out the
programming details of the problems with anyone or to collaborate to the extent that your programs are identifiably
similar. You are not allowed to look at or in any way derive advantage from solutions or code that you did not write.
If you worked on the projects in the past (e.g., if you are repeating EECS 482), you are not allowed to re-use code
that your group wrote from the prior semester.
If you have any questions as to what constitutes unacceptable collaboration, please talk with an instructor. You are
expected to take reasonable precautions to protect your work. You may not post your work in a publically accessible
location, such as public code repositories. Don't let other students borrow your account or computer; don't leave your
program in a publicly accessible directory; and don't discard printouts in a public place.
6.4 Tips for success on the projects
The most common reason for doing poorly on the projects is starting them late. You will be given plenty of time to
complete each project. However, if you wait until the last minute to start, you may not be able to finish. Start early,
and plan to have it finished a few days ahead of the due date. Expect to spend more time debugging the code than
you did writing it.
The most common reason for spending too much time on a project is coding before thinking through the entire
project. Resist the urge to start writing code as your first step; you are likely to code yourself into a corner. Meet
with your group and plan out the architecture of your solution. Expect to revise this architecture several times before
settling on a plan. Read the project description carefully, and list the behaviors the specifications require of your
solution. The more you think through and understand what needs to be programmed before you write code, the
better. Design your project with independently and incrementally testable subsystems rather than saving all testing
for the end. Assign one project member as the Testing Czar; that member's job is to see how he or she can break the
group's solution with the simplest possible test. Another common reason for spending too much time on a project is
debugging by trying things at random, just to see if they work. If you find a workaround without understanding why
it fixes the problem, you may be masking the problem rather than fixing it, and it will probably cause more problems
later and be harder to fix. If you find yourself in this position, step away from the computer and think about what is
happening, or come see an instructor in office hours.
There are many sources of help on which you can draw. Most questions can be submitted to the teaching staff and
your fellow classmates via the discussion forum. These will typically be answered within the day, often more
quickly during working hours. However, some types of questions cannot be answered without seeing your project. If
EECS 482 syllabus.hnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

EECS 482 syllabus
you have detailed questions about your program, speak to an instructor during office hours. Students are also
encouraged to help one another on the course concepts (but not the implementation of the projects). One of the best
ways for you to make sure that you understand a concept is to explain it to someone else. Keep in mind, however,
that you should not expect anyone else to do any part of your project for you. The project that you turn in must be
your own.
Many computing sites have consultants who are available to help you. They can often help with questions about the
computers, printers, and installed software (e.g., Unix, AFS, e-mail). However, they probably will not be able to
help you with questions about operating systems, C++, or specific errors in your program.
7. Exams
There will be two exams during the semester: a midterm exam and the final exam. You are expected to take both
exams at the scheduled times.
If you miss an exam for reasons other than a documented medical or personal emergency, you will receive a zero for
that exam. If you anticipate a conflict with an exam time, talk to the instructor at least one month before the exam
date. Exam dates are given at the beginning of the semester so you can avoid scheduling job interviews or other
commitments on those days. Outside commitments are not considered a valid reason for missing an exam.
8. Online instruction
This semester's class will be delivered online. To participate effectively in class, students will need reliable, high-
speed Internet and consistent and reliable access to a computer that supports project development.
Lectures and lab sections will be interactive and geared for students who are attending synchronously. To
accomodate students who cannot attend lectures or labs synchronously, lectures and Jabs will be recorded and made
available afterwards to students in this class. As part of your participation in this course, you may be recorded. If you
do not wish to be recorded, please contact the instructors in the first week of class to discuss alternative
arrangements.
Students may not record or distribute any class activity without written permission from the instructor, except as
necessary as part of approved accommodations for students with disabilities. Any approved recordings may only be
used for the student's own private use.
Office hours will be managed via oh.cecs umich.edu. When you join the office-hour queue, please post a link to a
videoconference (e.g., Google Meet or Zoom) that you and your group members are in, and an instructor will join
your meeting when it is your turn.
We expect to offer several time windows for each exam to accomodate students in different time zones. Exams will
likely include programming questions that require access to your project code and a development platform.
9. Grading
Final grades will be based on a weighted average of the points earned on projects and exams (see weights below).
You must average a passing grade on the exams to receive a passing grade for the class. Factors such as class
participation may be used to adjust your final grade, especially if it falls on a borderline.
Project 1: 3%
Project 2: 15%
Project 3: 15%
Project 4: 15%
Midterm exam: 26%
Final exam: 26%
10. Computers
The standard computing platform for this course is x86-64 PCs with RHEL 7 and g++ 9.1.0 (with -std=c++17),
EECS 482 syllabus.hnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

EECS 482 syllabus
which are available in CAEN labs.
The project libraries and executables we provide should also work on other versions of Linux (e.g., Ubuntu) and on
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), and we will also try to provide versions that can be used on recent versions
of MacOS (10.14 or later). These versions are not officially supported, but we hope they are still useful.
11. Semester schedule
[vac 1- 3 Jadsess quo
[ie D Ave 1 wong ndtboedamens id
a
TE

EECS 482 syllabus.hnl[202 1/1/20 10:51:18)
