Syllabus
EECS 497 - Human-Centered Software Design and Development
ENGR 455-400 - Multidisciplinary Software Development *
Winter 2021
‘Note: If you are enrolled in ENGR 255/355, you have been included in this
course simply for your own interest. At this time, the only work that you will be
responsible for completing will be managed exclusively by MDP.
Class Times
There are no official class times as lectures will be delivered asynchronously via lecture
recordings. However, there will be synchronous office hours (see below). In order to track your
virtual “attendance” in each lecture, you will need to fill out a short lecture summary using the
form linked on Canvas as proof that you “attended" the virtual lecture.
Course Staff
Jeff Ringenberg — jringenb@umich.edu
Office Hour(s): Mondays, 1:00-2:30p EDT/EST
Office Hour(s) location: Zoom (click here)!
Ju Young (Lisa) Kim — kimjuyou@umich.edu
Office Hour(s): TBD
Office Hour(s) location: Zoom (click here)!
Course Overview
"When you design for everyone, you design for no one.”
This phrase describes one of the key reasons why software design (and development) can
quickly lead to failure. In this course, we will address this problem by covering a wide variety of
topics that are significant in the creation of great software but that are frequently overlooked.
The number of topics that we could potentially cover in this course is quite large. In fact, there
are so many important topics that we can’t reasonably cover them all in one semester.
For EECS 497: For ENGR 455-400:
As a part of MDP, you are required to take a
second semester of this course to learn more


=== PAGE BREAK ===

If you are interested in learning more about about multidisciplinary software development

human-centered software for a second and to continue the work on your sponsored

semester and/or you would like to continue project.

working on your project for an additional

semester(s), please contact course staff

about the possibility of pursuing this through a

directed study.
The end goal of this course Is for teams to participate in the complete software design and
development cycle, from idea incubation to product delivery, and to create successful software
products that incorporate effective design strategies and project management methodologies.
Team Composition

For EECS 497: For ENGR 455-400:

Teams will be composed of 3-5 students. In. Teams will vary in size and will consist of a

order to foster and apply effective design sub-team of CS students and a second

methodologies, EECS 497 projects must Domain sub-team of non-CS students chosen

incorporate components of the “not-you to fulfill the requirements of individual projects

philosophy”. Briefly, this means that in the Multidisciplinary Design Program

significant elements of each project mustbe = (MDP). All projects will include the

associated with users that differ from the participation of a real customer and be

project’s team members in a substantial way. developed according to their requirements.
Reference Textbooks
Note: You don’t need to purchase these, however, you are required to learn the material that
is covered in lecture.

Software Engineering
Hiiogril A PRACTITIONER'S APPROACH
SS SIN
Rapid Contextual Design Software Engineering: A Practitioner's
Holtzblatt, Wendell, and Wood, 2008 Approach (8th Edition)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

ISBN: 978-0123540515 McGraw-Hill Education, 2014
ISBN: 978-00780221 28
Selected online readings may also be posted separately on Canvas.
Main Course Topics
Under the above course model, the first (main) semester will cover critical topics in the early
stages of software creation such as customer discovery, contextual inquiry, prototyping, process
models, project scheduling, UI/UX design, development, and testing/debugging. A second
semester would continue with topics such as security, change management, maintenance,
business considerations, case studies, intellectual property, and entrepreneurism. Finally,
several other “non-traditional” subjects may be covered at various points during either semester
to further your ability to be the best programmer possible. These include topics such as team
dynamics, creative problem solving, dealing with failure, leadership, and conflict resolution.
A full list of topics can be found in the Course Schedule.
Grading Scheme - EECS 497 Only
Testing and Debugging Report
Factors such as class and team participation may be used to adjust your final grade, especially
if it falls on a borderline. There is a ‘gray area’ of several points around each specific numeric
grade, within which a + system is used. Two people getting the same numeric grade might
therefore receive different letter grades for the course. If the student is in one of these gray
areas, their grade may go up or down depending upon whether course performance has been
improving or declining, or whether participation in group work has been sufficient or inadequate.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Working with your team remotely
One of the main goals for this course is to make it possible for you to complete this course
without needing to meet with anyone in person. That said, face-to-face interactions are
absolutely critical to effective teams in general. Therefore, your team should look over the
following list of resources to see what tools can be used to help facilitate more interactive forms
of communication. | suspect that you know of many more resources and you are free to use
them as well. If you do know of any other tools, please share them with us on Piazza. With
that, here’s the list:

e Zoom: Pretty much the de facto standard for video conferencing in the COVID-

era.

e BlueJeans: Another video conferencing option

e Hangouts Meet: Yet another video conferencing option

e GitLab: | suspect that many of you have already used this (or GitHub)

e Jira Software: A more “commercial” tool for project management

e MicrosoftTeams: Another tool for team management
Ethics, Decency, and Sudent Conduct
While the topics of ethics and decency are quite complex, especially when it comes to the
development of software, the goal of this course is for each student team to create projects that
would be deemed as ethical and decent from a practical viewpoint. Given that users can
generally make bad decisions that violate this policy regardless of the application, we simply
require that any project that could be used in such a manner that would be deemed unethical
and/or indecent should have modest safeguards put in place to address any concerns. In other
words, your projects should not actively encourage unethical and/or indecent behavior nor
should they present this type of material in any form.
In addition, in accordance with the General Standards of Conduct for Engineering Students (link
to external site) and the University’s Statement of Student Rights and Responsibility (link to
external site), we are committed to a policy of equal opportunity and expect all students in this
course, regardless of academic major, to follow any and all standards that have been
established in the aforementioned links. Please feel free to contact us with any problems,
concerns, or suggestions.
We expect that all students will treat each other with R.E.S_P.E.C.T.
Cheating Policies
You may be required to complete some of your coursework individually. In these cases, you are
encouraged to form groups and to discuss your work at the conceptual level with your fellow


=== PAGE BREAK ===

students. However, translating those ideas into computational artifacts and any related write-up
should be performed without help from fellow students. Copying from a current or former
student, a former instructor, or an instructor from another section, either manually or
electronically, is considered cheating. In addition, it is unacceptable to provide your work to
another student. However, you may (and are encouraged) to employ solutions supplied by your
current instructors or the course website.

All individual assignments, quizzes, and exams must be carried out completely on your own,
without aid from any of your fellow students.
