EECS 376: Foundations of Computer Science
Fall 2020
Instructors: Amir Kamil akamil@umich.edu
Ilya Volkovich ilyavol@umich.edu
GSls: Anthony Liu Ethan Zell
IAs: Mollie Bakal Thomas Larsen
Lily Ge Juliet Levesque
Scott Guest Peter Ly
Reuben Gutmann Hadley Peterson
Ali Baker lan Robinson
Anzhelika lugai Misha Sashko
Charmee Kamdar Anjali Vyas
Katie Knister Sam Zayko
PT
TED


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Office Hours:

® = Alloffice hours will be conducted remotely over Zoom.

@ We will hold both Individualized and group office hours as indicated below.

@ See the Google Calendar linked from Canvas for the most up-to-date information.

@ = The times below are tentative and will be finalized shortly. This document will be updated as things
change.

® = Zoom links will be added when we start holding office hours at the end of the first week of the term.

Monday: Anjali (10:30am-11:30am), Katie (12:00pm - 2:00pm), Prof. Kamil (2:00pm - 3:00pm), Scott

(3:00pm - 4:00pm), Lily (4:30pm - 6:30pm), Reuben (5:00pm - 7:00pm)

Tuesday: Mollie (10am - 12pm), Scott (12:00pm - 1:00pm), lan (1:00pm - 3:00pm), Charmee (3:00pm -

5:00pm), Hadley (5:00pm - 7:00pm)

Wednesday: Misha (10:00am - 12:00pm), Juliet (12:00pm - 2:00pm) Sam (4:30pm - 6:30pm)

Thursday: Anjali (10:30am-11:30am), Anzhelika (12:00pm - 2:00pm), Prof. Volkovich (2:00pm - 3:00pm)

Friday: Ethan (10:00 am - 12:00pm), Thomas (2:00pm - 4:00pm), Peter (4:00pm - 6:00pm)

Zoom: You will need a Zoom account through the university. You can sign up for one here:

httys://umich.zoom.us/. if you have a personal Zoom account using your UM email, you will have to

convert your account to a university one. Please follow the instructions here:

https://documentation. its. umich.edu/zoom-account-switch

Textbook: Although the course does not have a required textbook, the following books will be good

references:

Michael Sipser, “Introduction to the Theory of Computation,” 2nd or 3rd editions.

Cris Moore and Stephan Mertens, “The Nature of Computation” (free online through the U-M Library).

Both course slides and additional materials will be posted online.

Prerequisites: EECS 203 and EECS 280 or equivalent.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

General Info:
EECS 376 provides an introduction to the theory of computation, including: algorithms, computability,
complexity, and cryptography.
By the end of the course, students are expected to understand the fundamental results about the power
and limits of computation, including: algorithmic paradigms, upper and lower bounds, undecidability, and
NP-completeness. Students should also be able to apply this knowledge to problems that they encounter
in the future.
Adetailed schedule for the class can be found on the Canvas page.
Course Format and Requirements:
The class time will be spent in lecture, having discussion and working in small groups. All aspects of the
course will be conducted remotely, and recordings will be made available for at least one lecture and one
discussion section. While we do not require synchronous participation, we recommend attending and
participating in classes (both lectures and discussions) live, if possible.
All times and deadlines for this course are in Ann Arbor (Eastern) time.
A Piazza page has been established to help with discussion outside of class. Any question that is not
private and might be of interest to other students in the class should be posted to Piazza. Please note that
the staff might ask you to post your questions on Piazza if we feel it will be beneficial to other students.
https://piazza.com/umich/fall2020/eecs3 76
For other questions, you can reach the course staff at: eecs376-F20@umich.edu
If you send the course staff an email that requires more than a few sentences of reply, you might be asked
to attend office hours or set up an individual meeting.
If you do not get a reply within 48 hours, please resend your email. The course staff will work very hard to
be respectful of you. Please be respectful and professional in your emails.
Course Grading:

Course Evaluation and Computing CARES Surveys
Below are the guaranteed grade thresholds: if your final raw score exceeds the threshold for grade X, your
final letter grade will be X or better. The actual thresholds will be determined after the final exam, but will
be no higher than what appears below. (E.g.,a score of 87% or above is guaranteed to receive a B+ or
better.) A failing grade on the final exam is grounds for failing the course.
A 94% and above
Ast 90%
Bt: 87%
B: 83%
B-: 80%
Ct: 71%
CG 70%


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Grading Philosophy:

In any humanities or social science class, you must write clearly and concisely to get your point across. It is
not sufficient that a correct argument appears somewhere in your answer, if it is also accompanied by
incorrect or faulty reasoning. The same applies for this course: your responses must be clear, concise, and
correct to receive full credit.

Components of Grade:

Homework Assignments (40%

Homework assignments play an important role in the learning process.

There will be 12 weekly assignments HW0 - HW11, due at 10:59PM on Wednesdays (except HW11,
which will be due 11:59PM on Tuesday due to the end of the semester).

Late assignments will receive no credit. However, the two lowest homework scores will be dropped.
Therefore, each homework assignment is worth 4% of your final grade. Unfortunately, exceptions can
only be made for emergency situations (e.g. family or medical}, and should be requested with as much
notice as possible and/or be evidenced by documentation. Please plan accordingly and/or be ready to
provide documentation of medical appointments, etc.

Each assignment will consist of both effort-based and regular problems.

The effort questions are graded subjectively on the perceived effort. That is, getting full points on effort
questions amounts to making an attempt at a valid argument or approach but, perhaps, missing some
details along the way. However, each problem will be graded differently. For example, if you are asked to
do an induction proof and co not state either a base case or an induction hypothesis, that almost certainly
will not count as a "reasonable effort" - even if you find some other way to do the proof. In the same way,
if your proposed hypothesis is a clear misunderstanding of the question, you might get some or no points.
Grading on effort questions is often going to be subjective (beyond correct and complete answers of
course being objectively correct).

Regular problems are designed to test your understanding of the material and will typically be deeper
and/or more challenging problems.

Midterm (24%) and Final Exam (32%

One midterm and a cumulative final exam will be given. A large fraction of the questions on these exams
will be similar to homework and class problems or very slight variations/extensions. Thus a good way to
study is to make sure you know how to solve these problems.

Course Evaluation and Computing CARES Surveys (4%)

The course evaluations and Computing CARES surveys are important to us and count 4% towards your
final grade. Students will receive two points by submitting the midterm and the final course evaluations
{one point each) and uploading the receipts from the course evaluations to Canvas as separate
assignments. Students will receive two points (one point each) by submitting the Computing CARES
surveys before their deadlines.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Regrading Policy:

If astudent feels that credit has been inappropriately allocated, then they should ask for a regrade. The
student should submit a request via Gradescope along with an explanation of what was incorrectly graded
and why. Regrade requests must be made within one week of an assignment being graded.

***No oral and/or e-mail regrade requests will be accepted***

Students are cautioned that they have the possibility of both gaining and losing points (i.e., if the regrade
determines that the answer was more incorrect than marked). Students are reminded that accuracy alone
is not sufficient; the answer should also be clear and concise.

Honor Code and Collaboration:

Unless otherwise specified in an assignment, all submitted work must be your own, original work. If you
are referencing others’ work, put it in quotes! If you are directly quoting, or building on others’ writing,
provide a citation. See the Rackham Graduate policy on Academic and Professional Integrity for the
definition of plagiarism, and associated consequences. Violations of the Honor Code will be taken
seriously; please see details at http://honorcode.engin.umich.edu/

Students are encouraged to collaborate (except when taking exams). Please use Piazza to this effect and
also to find other students to work with on assignments, i.e., create study/homework groups. However,
when turning in work that benefited from a collaboration, the student must state that clearly. Students
must write their solutions on their own and may not look at any other student's write-up.

Course Technology Policy:

Students who need loaner laptops and reside in the United States may request one from ITS:

https: //its. umich.edu/computing/computers-software/sites-at-home

We encourage you to attend lectures and discussion sections synchronously if possible. When
participating in remote lecture, discussion, or office hours, please keep yourself muted unless you are
actively talking to the other participants. Background noise can be distracting to your peers.

Course lectures and discussions may be audio/video recorded and made available to other students in this
course. As part of your participation in this course, you may be recorded. If you do not wish to be
recorded, you may keep yourself muted during class sessions. Chat transcripts will also be recorded. If you
would like to ask a question in chat but do not want it in the recording, you can send a private chat
message to the instructor, which will not show up in the recording.

Students may not record or distribute any class activity without written permission from the instructor,
except as necessary as part of approved accommodations for students with disabilities. Any approved
recordings may only be used for the student’s own private use.

Student Sexual Misconduct

Policy Title IX prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, which includes sexual misconduct — including
harassment, domestic and dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking. We understand that sexual
violence can undermine students’ academic success and we encourage anyone dealing with sexual
misconduct to talk to someone about their experience, so they can get the support they need.
Confidential support and academic advocacy can be found with the Sexual Assault Prevention and
Awareness Center (SAPAC) on their 24-hour crisis line, (734) 936-3333 and at sapac.umich.edu.

Alleged violations can be non-confidentially reported to the Office for Institutional Equity (OIE) at
institutional.equity@umich.edu


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Student Mental Health and Wellbeing

We want you to be successful in and outside of this class. If you or someone you know is feeling
overwhelmed, depressed, and/or in need of support, services are available. For help, contact Counseling
and Psychological Services (CAPS) at (734) 764-8312 and caps.umich.edu during and after hours, on
weekends and holidays, or through its counselors physically located in schools on both North and Central
Campus. You may also consult University Health Service (UHS) at (734) 764-8320 and
https://www_uhs.umich.edu/mentalhealthsvcs, or for alcohol or drug concerns, see
www.uhs.umich.edu/aodresources. For a listing of other mental health resources available on and off
campus, please visit: htto://umich.edu/~mhealth/

Accommodations for Students with Disabilities

If you think you need an accommodation for a disability, please let the course staff know at your earliest
convenience by completing the online form:

https://forms gle/W8iQNdPsB7iUSiWN7

Some aspects of this course, the assignments, the in-class activities, and the way we teach may be
modified to facilitate your participation and progress. As soon as you make any of the staff aware of your
needs, we can work with the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) to help us determine
appropriate accommodations. SSD (734-763-3000; http://www.umich.edu/~sswa/) typically recommends
accommodations through a Verified Individualized Services and Accommodations (VISA) form. The course
staff will treat any information you provide as private and confidential.

Exam Conflicts

Everyone is expected to take all exams at the scheduled times. The times of the exams can be found on
the course schedule. It is departmental, college, and university policy that travel schedules and holiday
activities never take precedence over exam schedules. Alternate exam will be given only in very
exceptional cases such as serious illness or a similarly serious family emergency.

We will accommodate people residing in time zones that necessitate an alternate time.

Ina case of a conflict due to a university sponsored event (such as participation in a sponsored sports
event or a competition) a university official in charge of the event should contact the instructors at least
three weeks in advance to determine how the missing grade will be made up.

Note that end-of-term transportation matters, such as the availability of inexpensive air tickets in
mid-December, are not acceptable reasons for an absence.

Research Disclosure

Your class work might be used for research purposes. For example, we may use anonymized student
assignments to design algorithms or build tools to help programmers. Any student who wishes to opt out
can contact the course staff (eecs376-F20@umich.edu) to do so at any time up to seven days after final
grades have been issued. This has no impact on your grade in any manner.

Right to Revise

The course staff reserve the right to make changes to the syllabus at any time as they see fit. Whena
revision occurs, it will be announced, and it is your responsibility to be informed of such.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Good luck!
