Winter 2021 -- EECS 598-007
Adversarial Machine Learning
Instructor: Atul Prakash, CSE Division, U. of Michigan

This is anew special topics course that will look at recent advances in the field of adversarial
machine learning, both from an attack and defense perspective. Deep neural networks (DNNs)
are widely used in computer vision for both detecting and classifying objects and are relevant to
emerging systems for autonomous driving. Unfortunately, there is a question of trust, are
machine learning (ML) models sufficiently robust to make correct decisions when human safety
is at risk? This course will examine research papers in this field looking at vulnerabilities or
defenses in machine learning systems with respect to various types of attacks including data
poisoning attacks during training time or during online learning, data perturbation attacks on a
trained model to cause misclassifications, and deepfake attacks. Papers on bias and fairness in
machine learning systems are also within scope.

The class will be conducted seminar style and involve presentations by students, discussions,
and projects to help everyone in the class up to speed on the foundations and cutting-edge
research in the field. Each group will be expected to share a summary of one attack paper and
one defense paper and present the paper to the class during the semester. The group should
attempt to reproduce a subset of the results of the paper being presented (or in the rare case
that is not possible due to lack of datasets, sufficient detail, lack of computational resources, or
models, another paper that is presented in the class.) or, for a defense paper, try an interesting
attack to break the scheme. The presentation would be for about 30 minutes + Q&A and should
include:

e Motivate the paper: what is the problem being solved?

e Whatis the key idea at a high level?

e What are the key technical details and some examples, including key theoretical or
experimental results?

e Are the experiments carried out by the group consistent with the authors' findings? Any
surprises, bugs, or interesting observations? Feel free to try the approach on a different
dataset.

e Fora defense paper, were you able to defeat the defense?

e Differences from closely related work?

Try to raise questions throughout the presentation to generate discussions by creating a few
pop-up questions to assess understanding.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

For the questions, it would be best to provide a couple of questions a few days before the class
to the instructor(s) via Google Forms. Ideally, the questions should be somewhat open-ended or
require some thinking (e.g., what is the main contribution of the paper? What is the main
limitation of the paper? Or a technical question on the data presented or the formulation of the
problem). Those will be shared with the students and students are expected to read the paper
and submit the answers to them individually. During the class, after the presentation if time
permits, we will try to have some breakout sessions where students can discuss the answer in
small groups and then post back a revised answer.

The course will also have one open-ended project with most work completed about 2-3 weeks
before the end of the semester. An example style of project would be to formulate a defense
hypothesis against a potential attack strategy on an ML algorithm against a class of attacks that
are hard to defend against. You will then develop your defense code and test the defense
against existing adaptive and non-adaptive attacks. Each group will present their final project
and findings to the class in a 20 minute presentation in the last 3 weeks. The group will also
submit a final project report that is written in the style of a 8-page paper (e.g., see CVPR or
Neurips format), along with supplementary materials.

Grading:

There is no midterm or final exam in the course. Instead, leaming will be experiential by
studying papers, presenting them, reproducing some of the findings in the papers, discussing
the papers, doing an open-ended project, and writing a report in the form of a paper on your
work. Points break-down is as follows:

Class presentations: 15%

Class participation, including answering questions on the papers : 15%

Reproducing results on attack: 10%

Reproducing results on defense: 10%

Final project and presentation: 50%

For group work, you will be asked to rate your contribution and the contribution of your
teammates. That can be factored into the grading.

Prerequisites:

Graduate standing or permission from the instructor. Students should have some exposure to
the machine leaming area (e.g., having taken EECS 445 or a similar course) and be
comfortable with coding in a language such as Python and working in a Linux-based terminal


=== PAGE BREAK ===

environment. It is likely that some of the code development will take place remotely over SSH.
Most papers in the field assume that the reader is familiar with linear algebra, probability,
statistics, and calculus. Experimental work in adversarial machine learning tends to mostly use
Python-based frameworks such as PyTorch, Kieras, or Tensorflow (| use mostly PyTorch in my
own research group). Your projects and the work on reproducing results on attack and defenses
are likely to involve using one of these Python frameworks for machine leaming.

Textbook and Computational Resources:

There is no textbook for the course. But, developing machine leaming models that are
adversarially robust can be computationally expensive and would be too slow on a CPU. You
will likely need access to a GPU-based system that is equipped with an NVidia GPU. NVidia
GPUs have the best support currently for running frameworks such as PyTorch or TensorFlow.
If you do not have an NVidia GPU on your computer, you could use cloud-based computation
resources at AWS or Azure or at Lambda Labs. But, an altemative university-based solution,
we do have access to the Great Lakes cluster (https://arc-ts. umich.edu/contact-us/), which is
Linux-based, that can be used only for class use. CAEN also has installed packages on their
Windows machines that can be remotely accessed for machine learning work that is relevant to
this course. You can also likely use for free Google CoLab, which would be faster than training
models on a CPU, but likely slower than Great Lakes or a paid GPU service.
Applicability to Degree Requirements

The course counts towards the Computer Science Ph.D. Depth requirements. For M.S.
students, this course is considered a 500-level elective. For undergraduate students, please
visit this page for further information on how various special topics courses count towards your
degree requirements.

Class Calendar link:
https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/O?cid=¥ 19saGZuZDUyb Wdvaz RianB2dGU3ZnBscHRs
cOBnem9icC5jYWixlbmRhci5nb29nbGUuyY 29t

Lecture zoom link: Join Zoom Meeting. You need to sign in using your umich ID into Zoom.
The lecture link is also available in the course calendar (visible in Umich domain).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

ee ee ee

Jan. 21 Tutorial by Tianji on
computing infrastructure
(class ends at 4 PM)

Jan. 26 Intriguing properties of neural
networks
Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples

Jan. 28 Adversarial examples in the
physical world
The limitations of deep
learning in adversarial
settings

Feb. 2 Deepfool: a simple and
accurate method to fool deep
neural networks
On the effectiveness of
defensive distillation

Feb. 4 Towards Evaluating the
Robustness of Neural
Networks


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Feb. 9 Towards Deep Learning
Models Resistant to
Adversarial Attacks
Obfuscated Gradients Give a
False Sense of Security:
Circumventing Defenses to
Adversarial Examples

Feb. 11 Efficient Adversarial Training
with Transferable Adversarial
Examples
Adversarial Examples Are
Not Easily Detected:
Bypassing Ten Detection
Methods

Feb. 16 Adversarial Example
Defenses: Ensembles of
Weak Defenses are not
Strong
Robust physical-world attacks
on deep leaming visual
Classification

Feb. 18 Provable defenses against
adversarial examples via the
convex outer adversarial
polytope
Theoretically Principled
Trade-off between
Robustness and Accuracy

_ PT


=== PAGE BREAK ===

a a
pf
a a
a ee
a ee
pf
a a
Sf
py
a ee
a
pf


=== PAGE BREAK ===

a a
pf
a a
re ee
a ee
pf
pe
ee
a a
a ee
a
pf


=== PAGE BREAK ===

ee
