Jump to Today
EECS 281: Data Structures and Algorithms
Fall 2020
- Basic Information
Faculty Instructors
Prof. Marcus Darden, 2644 Beyster, secs281admin@umich.edu
Dr. Hector Garcia, 3640 Beyster,
(mailto: 281admin@umich.edu)
Mr. Maximilian Krogius, eecs281admin@umich.edu (mallto:eecs281admin@umich.edu)
Dr. David Paoletti, 2645 Beyster, cecs281admin@umich.edu (mailto:eecs281admin@umich.edu)
Office Hours
Office hours will be posted to the Google Calendar on Canvas
Other resources
Course web page (all sections): Canvas: htips://umich,instructure,com/
Course forum/chat (all sections): Piazza, please sign up here:
https://piazza,com/umich/winter2020/eecs281 » (https://piazza,com/umich/winter2020/eecs281)
Course administrative email (used for special circumstances such as illness):
eecs281admin@umich.edu (mailto:eecs281admin@umich.edu}
- Course Overview
EECS 281 is an introductory course in data structures and algorithms at the undergraduate level.
The objective of the course is to present a number of fundamental techniques to solve common
programming problems. For each of these problems, we will determine an abstract specification for a
solution and examine one or more potential representations to implement the abstract specification,
focusing on those with significant advantages in time/space required to solve large problem
instances. When appropriate, we will consider special cases of a general problem that admit
particularly elegant solutions.
- Lectures


=== PAGE BREAK ===

The lectures will be recorded online, live, at the scheduled class time. Please refer to the Schedule
of Topics at the left for a link to each video. The link will be populated about one day before the video
is scheduled to be made.

- Prerequisites

Students must have obtained a grade of C or better in each of EECS 203 and EECS 280, or have
equivalent knowledge of discrete mathematics and C++ programming. MATH 465 or MATH 565 are
accepted in lieu of EECS 203. Due to the overwhelming number of students interested in this
course, we will strictly enforce the prerequisites. If you failed to complete, or if you received a
grade of C- or below in any of the prerequisites, then you must drop EECS 2871 this term, and re-
enroll at a later term, after you have completed all prerequisites with a grade of C or better.
Students will be expected to use the "make" utility to automate C++ compilation. Also, students
should be able to generate plots using MS-Excel, OpenOffice, Gnuplot, or similar tools. Students
with questions about whether they have sufficient preparation for this course should speak with the
instructor(s) as soon as possible.

- Two-Attempt Rule

Per departmental policy, each student may attempt EECS 281 twice at most. One attempt in EECS
281 is defined as one instance where EECS 281 appears on your UM transcript - including but not
limited to a letter grade (A-E), withdrawal (W), pass/fail (P/F), incomplete (I). At most one attempt
from Summer 2014 or earlier will count towards this limit. If you drop EECS 281 prior to the date
which a W would appear on your transcript, then that would not count as an attempt for the purposes
of this policy. Exceptions to this policy can be granted by the appropriate Chief Program Advisor
under extraordinary circumstances only.

- Reading List

Readings come from (both are available electronically to UM students at no extra cost):

« Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd Edition. by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein. MIT Press,
2009 2 {https://mlriyn.lib.umich.edu/Record/011694922) (click on Available Online below the
Holdings tab)

° The C++ Standard Library: A Tutorial and Reference, 2nd ed.. by N Josuttis, Addison Wesley
Publishing, 2012  _(https://learning,oreilly,com/library/view/the-c-
standard/9780132978286/copyright. html}

There may also be some handouts that the faculty will provide. You are required to read the contents
of the course website and regularly visit Piazza, where we will post important course-related
information.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

. Grading Policy
Your work in this course is composed of: attending lecture and lab sections, reading assigned
material, completing lab assignments, completing projects, taking a midterm exam, and taking a final
exam. Final grades will be based on the total points earned on the labs, projects, and exams.
Factors such as improvement and course participation may be used to adjust your final grade,
especially if it falls on a borderline. The weight assigned to each category is as follows:
Lab Assignments 20% (each lab assignment weighted equally)
Projects 40% (each project weighted equally)
Midterm Exam 20%
Final Exam 20%
. Grading Errors
We make every effort to grade correctly, however we do sometimes make mistakes. Arithmetic
errors can be corrected in person by your IA or GSI. If you believe something was graded incorrectly,
you may submit it for a regrade. All exam regrade requests must be made on Gradescope. Regrade
requests for other assignments must be made via email explaining the technical reason(s) that would
make a regrade necessary. The email must be sent to eecs281admin@umich.edu
{mallto:eecs281admin@umich.edu) with “EECS 281 Regrade Request’ in the subject line. All regrade
requests must be submitted no later than five working days after the graded work is returned to the
student - after that, your score on the assignment in question stands. This includes requesting that
errors in recording a score in Canvas be fixed. Regrade requests must be an objective argument
about which specific rubric items were inconsistently or improperly applied, not a subjective
argument about what things should be worth. The work in question will be regraded carefully
from scratch in its entirety, with consideration given to the written request. As a result, your grade
might go up, stay the same, or go down.
For the midterm exam, we will begin accepting regrade requests two calendar days after your exam
is released to you on Gradescope. This is to force you to wait until you have carefully reviewed your
exam responses and the rubric before submitting a regrade request. Regrade requests for the
midterm exam will still close five working days after the scores are released, not after we begin
accepting regrade requests. For the final exam, your exam will not be released to you, and you will
need to see an instructor in office hours to view your exam. In that case, the instructor will regrade
your final exam with you side-by-side.
For lab handwritten parts, you have until the Friday of the week immediately following the lab
in question to dispute your score.
- Incompletes
Incompletes will generally not be given except in extreme circumstances. In accordance with
university policy, doing poorly in a course is not a valid reason for an incomplete. If you are having


=== PAGE BREAK ===

problems in the course, please talk to the instructor(s) as soon as you are able.

- Minimum Competency
To pass this course, you MUST achieve at least a 55% average on the Programming Projects AND a
50% average (curved scores) on the exams AND a 75% average on lab assignments. You must
achieve ALL of these thresholds separately - very high exam scores will not compensate for very
low project scores, and vice versa. If you receive at least 220 project points AND at least 100 exam
points total for the term AND at least 150 lab points, you are guaranteed at least a grade of C in the
course. Rounding is not guaranteed, so 219.999999 project points OR 99.999999 exam points OR
149.999999 lab points does not guarantee passing.

- Curving
The Midterm and Final Exams will be curved if needed, and any curve applied can only be in your
favor. For example, if the Midterm Exam tums out with a lower average than we would like, we might
set a bar of say 46 points for passing the Midterm, rather than 50. The table below gives you a lower
bound as to what your grade would be. That is, we may perform a final curving, which again may
improve someone's grade, but never reduce it. Rounding is not guaranteed, thus 90% overall
guarantees at least a grade of A-, 89.999999% does not - the cutoff must go somewhere and no
matter where it goes, there will always be somebody barely on either side of it.
Grades shown here are superseded by the “Minimum Competency” rules shown above. If you
achieve ALL thresholds, then the guarantee that you will receive at least a C in the course trumps
the scale shown in the table below. However, if you fail to meet at least one of the thresholds, then
you may still receive a C- or below even if the scale shown in the table below says that you should be
getting a higher grade. For example, if you have 60% overall, and achieve at least the minimum 55%
on projects and 50% on exams, you will receive a C, even though the table below says that you
should receive a D. On the other hand, if you only achieve 50% on projects, but 100% on everything
else, then despite that being 80% overall, your grade will be a C-, even though the table below says
that you should receive a B-.

Grae mine

aor 0]

aad

m9 0]

B 83 |<87


=== PAGE BREAK ===

=
oo 0]
om as]
eo |
- Final Note About Grades
Your grade is based solely on your performance for the work assigned in the course. We must be
consistent in how we evaluate students in order to be fair to all students, hence we must uniformly
enforce all deadlines and course policies, and we cannot give extra credit or makeup assignments on
an individual basis. If you need a certain grade in the course in order to make satisfactory progress
towards your major or minor, keep a scholarship, avoid having a contingent job offer rescinded, avoid
problems with your academic standing, etc., then you must earn the grade yourself by paying
attention to the work assigned for the course throughout the term. The course grade is not open to
student negotiation. While factors such as improvement can be used to move you across a grade
boundary in a very borderline case, this decision rests solely with the instructors and is not
negotiable.
We do caution you that from our experience, those who aim for only the minimum often finish the
term with a result that they are disappointed with. Even if your goal is only to receive a passing
grade, it is still in your best interest to put forth your best effort throughout the term. You are likely
taking EECS 281 to help you get a job, and we want you to succeed in getting a job. However, note
that many employers want to see a good understanding of data structures and algorithms (and not
just a grade for EECS 281) - if you take EECS 281 with the intent of just barely scraping by the
course, then you may encounter difficulty in the job search process.

°
- Lab Assignments
We will assign 10 lab assignments over the course of the semester (each equally weighted). Lab
submissions must not include external materials (e.q., web downloads) unless specifically requested


=== PAGE BREAK ===

in the assignment. Any extemal sources used must be clearly cited in the lab solution set. Lab work
is typically due as some combination of: (1) a written coding problem turned in on Gradescope; (2) a
quiz submission to the EECS 281 Canvas site; (3) a submission to the EECS 281 autograder. There
are no drops - experience shows that students would often just entirely skip "the hardest lab" or the
last lab of the term, and those choices will harm your understanding of important concepts discussed
in those labs. In the event of an extreme medical or personal situation, we may prorate a lab written
score (based on your scores on other portions of the lab) or extend a lab quiz deadline as
appropriate. In order to request this accommodation, you must email eecs281admin@umich.edu
{mailto:eecs281admin@umich.edu) before the deadline and provide documentation.
NOTE: Because COVID-19 has interrupted in-person classes, your "hand written" assignment
will be turned in on Gradescope each week. This is still great practice for the exams, since
you will be turning in written coding problems for the exams this way.

- Course Projects
Four projects will be assigned during the term. Project submissions must not include external
materials (e.g., web downloads) unless specifically requested in the assignment. These projects
will require substantial time commitment on every student’s part - you cannot start a project a
few days before it is due and expect to receive a good grade on it, even if this might have worked for
you in EECS 280. However, we expect that effort spent on programming projects will help the
student to gain a conceptual understanding of the material. We strongly recommend that students
begin working on projects early, both to lower stress and have more time to ask questions.

- Project Grading
The projects together total 40% of the course grade (10% each). The breakdown of points for each
project grade will be specified in the project assignment. Categories include:

« functional correctness;

e execution speed to obtain correct solution;

* principles and practices (readable code, efficient algorithms and implementation, comments, use

of topics from class); and

« documentation of your solution.
For each project, we will do a final grading run after the deadline, where every student's project is run
one-by-one on the autograder with hidden test cases. The purpose of running every student's project
one-by-one is to even out the playing field by giving everybody the same computing resources when
determining project grades, so your score should not be penalized because your runtime or memory
usage was affected by other students’ projects being run in parallel. The purpose of the hidden test
cases (they will be randomly generated cases, not the trickiest corner cases) is to ensure that your
project works in general, and not just for the autograder. We will use your best submission for final


=== PAGE BREAK ===

grading, unless you complete a form requesting that we use your last submission within 48 hours
after the project deadline. “Best submission” is defined as the submission with the highest displayed
score prior to the deadline. If multiple submissions are tied as being your best submission, then we
will use the most recent of those submissions for final grading. The score resulting from final
grading is the score that will go in the gradebook. This means that your overall highest
displayed score on the autograder may not necessarily be the score that goes in the
gradebook. It is possible that your score may go up, stay the same, or go down as a result of the
final grading. Most of the time, scores do not change by more than a few tenths of a point, but a
change between one to two points is still nothing we will be alarmed about. If a student's score
decreases by more than two points, the autograder will prompt us to manually review the situation.

- Turning in Projects
You will have roughly 2-3 weeks (roughly half the time in a spring term) to work on each project.
Projects will be submitted online to an autograder, and will only be accepted via the autograder.
Specific details of the project submission process will be described on the course website.
Sometimes unexpected events or other academic commitments make it difficult to get a project in on
time. Everybody is given two (2) late days for the semester to use on whatever project(s) and
for whatever reason, no questions asked. You can use them for illness, family emergency,
computer or equipment fallure, loss or erasure of files, Internet access problems, work for
other courses, and other outside commitments. Use them wisely! You must use one late per
calendar day after the deadline in order to submit a project late. If you want to submit a project one
day after the deadline, it will simply cost you one late day. If you want to submit a project two days
after the deadline, and you have already used one late day on that project for the day after the
deadline, then it will simply cost you a second late day. However, if you want to submit a project two
days after the deadline, but you did not use a late day on that project for the day after the deadline,
then it will still cost you two {not one) late days.
Aside from the late days, projects will not be accepted once the autograder closes, except in extreme
documented medical and personal emergencies. We advise you to use your late days for when the
unexpected occurs, and not for starting a project late. Often, it will be better to submit a partially
working assignment on time rather than spend an uncertain amount of additional time in getting it to
work completely. Because of auto-grading, it is important to carry out the project tasks in such a way
that you have at least a partially working project early on, which you enhance every day until the
project becomes due.

- Computing Facilities
All projects are to be written in C++. The student is free to use any environment to develop a
program, but any submitted program must compile and run in the CAEN Linux computing
environment (login.engin.umich.edu) using the GCC version 6.2.0 compller. You are
responsible for making sure that your projects run correctly in this environment. “My code runs fine
locally, but just not on CAEN” will not be considered justified for receiving special consideration.
Using CAEN Linux computing as your development environment will reduce the chance of


=== PAGE BREAK ===

encountering nasty surprises when your project is graded.

- Exams
There will be one midterm exam and one final examination. The midterm examination is scheduled
for Tuesday, October 20. The final examination is scheduled for Friday, December 11. There will
be two time slots available for each exam, to allow students in different time zones to take it during
"normal" waking hours.
If you miss an exam without a documented medical or personal emergency, you will recelve a
score of zero for that exam. If you have an exam conflict, or need SSD accommodations, you must
fill out the Alternate Exam Request form on Canvas, and submit any requested documentation at
least two weeks before the exam. Alternate exam requests are not accepted via email or Piazza.
The exam dates are given at the beginning of the term so that you can avoid scheduling job
interviews or other personal commitments on exam days. Per university policy, when altemate exam
times are available, they are not elective. You must have a documented and valid conflict in order to
take an altemate exam.
The following reasons may justify an alternate exam request:

« Disabilities - must be documented with an official SSD form.

* Varsity athletic competitions and travel - must be verified by a university official from the Athletics
Department.

« Conflicting exams and classes - if it is scheduled to end at least 30 minutes before or begin at
least 30 minutes after the EECS 281 exam, then it is not a conflict, even if it takes place on
central campus.

e Religious holidays.

« Family emergencies.

« lllness or injury - the physician’s note must specifically require that we excuse you from the exam
and provide an approximate date of recovery, “patient was seen in UHS’ note is insufficient.

The following reasons do not justify an alternate exam request:

« Job interviews - unless the company verifies that you do not have a choice with regards to
interview date.

« Conferences - unless a university faculty member verifies that you absolutely cannot opt out of
attendance.

« Employment.

e Athletic practice.

¢ Club meetings.

e Vacation, weddings, travel home - cheaper flights or accommodation will not be accepted as
justification.

These are not exhaustive lists, but you can notice that most of the reasons that do not justify an
alternate exam request are personal outside commitments, for which participation is voluntary. If you
have a personal outside commitment that conflicts with elther exam, and you are unwilling t