2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
Ramses .
wero EECS 370: INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER
O79 ORGANIZATION
FALL 2020
ANNOUNCEMENTS .
Course Overview
COURSE This course is intended to give you a basic understanding of how computers
OVERVIEW 5 ,
execute programs. Understanding computers means understanding the
hardware/software process of how you and the computer work together to have
LECTURES the computer carry out a task.
LECTURE In your introductory programming courses (e.g. EECS 280), you learned how to
RECORDINGS express a task in terms of a high-level programming language such as C or C++. In
EECS 370, you will see how a low-level language is executed by the hardware,
DISCUSSION and you will see how to put together basic hardware building blocks to form the
RECORDINGS functional units of a computer.
To achieve these goals, you will design and "build" simple computers at various
DISCUSSIONS . . ae . 5 5
levels of detail. In this course, building will not mean connecting chips and gates.
Rather, you will describe the hardware in diagrams, finite-state machines, and
STAFF AND HOURS
hardware simulators (written in C). To further your understanding of other
topics, we will provide practice questions that will be discussed in small
RESOURCES | ,. 5 .
‘discussion pods" (see below).
VIDEO REVIEW | Prerequisites
HOMEWORKS Students must have taken EECS 280. From that course they should have learned
and be comfortable with programming C++ on Unix. A brief overview of C vs. C++
PROJECTS will occur during the first discussion section of the semester. Also you can go to
staff office hours for additional help.
EXAMS | In addition, students should have taken either EECS 203 or EECS 270
ADMINISTRATIVE | Class Projects
REQUESTS a
Four projects will be assigned during the term, each of which will require a
PIAZZA substantial time commitment on your part. The first project will be divided in
three parts, each with a separate deadline. Many students find the work load in
this course to be heavy.
The most common reason for not doing well on the projects is not starting them
early enough. You will be given plenty of time to complete each project.
However, if you wait until the last minute to start, you may not be able to finish.
https:/www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370.20/course/ 16


=== PAGE BREAK ===

2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
Plan to do some work on a project every day. Also plan to have it finished about
2 days ahead of the due date - many unexpected problems arise during
programming, especially in the debugging phase. Office hours can become quite
crowded as deadlines approach, making it difficult to get help. Plan for these
things to happen. Your lack of starting early is not an excuse for turning in your
project late, even if some unfortunate situations arise such as having your
computer crash.
There are many sources of help on which you can draw. Many questions can be
submitted to the course staff and your fellow classmates via Piazza. These will
typically be answered within the day, often more quickly during working hours.
However, some types of questions cannot be answered without seeing your
project. If you have detailed questions on your program, speak to a GSI or
professor during office hours.
Students are also encouraged to help one another on the course concepts (but
not the implementation of the projects). One of the best ways for you to make
sure that you understand a concept is to explain it to someone else. Keep in
mind, however, that you should not expect anyone else to do any part of your
project for you. The project that you tum in must be completely your own.
Many computing sites have consultants who are available to help you at the site.
They are fine sources of help with questions regarding the computers and
installed software (such as Unix and the C compiler). However, they are not likely
to be able to help you with questions about computer programming, the C
language, or specific errors in your program.
Turning in Projects
Projects are due at 11:55pm Eastern time exactly on the due date.
You will be submitting your projects electronically by going to autograder.io. Your
projects will be graded automatically using an autograder program. You are
allowed to submit your programs as frequently as you wish. However, to deter
you from using the autograder as a debugger, you will receive autograder
feedback only FIVE TIMES a day. That is, only the first 5 submissions will be
graded and returned to you with your score on any given day. Additional
submissions beyond the initial 5 will be graded and recorded, but you will not
receive any feedback about them. For each project, your final score will be
derived from your best submission to the autograder.
Extensions
Sometimes unexpected problems make it difficult to get a project in on time. For
this reason, each person will have a total of 3 free late days to be used for
https:/www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370.20/course/ 216


=== PAGE BREAK ===

2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
projects throughout the semester. These late days should only be used to deal
with unexpected problems such as illness. They should not be used simply to
start later on a project or because you are having difficulty completing the
project. Thus, please plan your work accordingly so that you won't need to use
any of the late days unless there is a personal emergency. If you are having
trouble understanding the material or designing a program, please come to office
hours for help right away.
Project Grading
The projects will be graded primarily for correctness (doing all the required
tasks, simulating at the correct hardware level, and giving correct results). All
grading questions should first be discussed with a GSI or IA. If you cannot resolve
a problem with them, bring the project to the instructor.
Doing Your Own Project
All projects and exams in this course are to be done on your own. Any
suspected violation will result in the initiation of formal procedures with the
LS&A or Engineering Honor Council. Violators will receive a 0 in the project,
in addition to additional grade repercussions, as recommended by the
appropriate Honor Council.
We will be using a sophisticated automated program to correlate projects,
including those submitted in previous semesters.
We do encourage students to help each other learn the course material. As in
most courses, there is a boundary separating these two situations. You may give
or receive help on any of the concepts covered in lecture or discussion and on
the specifics of C syntax. You are allowed to consult with other students in the
current class to help you understand the project specification (i.e. the problem
definition). However, you may not collaborate in any way when constructing your
solution - the solution to the project must be generated by your work alone and
the work of other students must not have contributed to your solution. You are
not allowed to work out the programming details of the problems with anyone or
to collaborate to the extent that your programs are identifiably similar. You are
not allowed to look at or in any way derive advantage from the existence of
project specifications or solutions prepared in prior years (e.g. programs written
by former students, solutions provided by instructors, project handouts).
If you have any questions as to what constitutes unacceptable collaboration,
please talk to the instructor right away. You are expected to exercise reasonable
precautions in protecting your own work. Do not leave your program in a publicly
accessible directory, and take care when discarding printouts.
https:/www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370.20/course/ 3/6


=== PAGE BREAK ===

2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
Exams
There will be two exams this semester. You are expected to take the exams at
the scheduled times. If you do not take an exam without verifying a documented
medical or personal emergency causing you to miss an exam, you will receive a
zero for that exam. If you anticipate conflicts with the exam time, declare your
conflicts by 9/24/20. The exam dates are given near the beginning of the
semester so you can avoid scheduling job interviews or other commitments on
exam days. Outside commitments are not considered a valid reason for missing
an exam. If you need to request any special accommodation during any exam,
please bring the necessary paperwork from the SSD office by the end of the first
month of classes.
Homework
There will be six individual homework assignments during the semester, and
there is NO late day for homework assignments. Your homework assignments will
be posted on this website and will have a deadline set at 11:55pm for the day
the homework is due on Gradescope. Students can re-submit as much as they
would like until the deadline. Only the last submission will be graded. The files
can be typed up or written and then scanned. You will be able to drop one
homework assignment. Late assignments (even 1 minute late) turned in within 24
hours of when they are due will generally get 50% credit. Later assignments will
get a zero. Do note that you can drop one homework score.
Further, you will have group assignments. These will be done in groups of four or
five, with just one assignment turned in on Gradescope for the entire group.
Group assignments will be completed within the Discussion Pods detailed below.
Please be sure to have each member's name on the scanned document and to
turn in the assignment as a group assignment with everyone's name on
Gradescope.
You may not post homework answers on piazza or place them in any other public
forum (a webpage for example) or share them with others. Note that homework
constitutes a fairly small factor in your final grade. Their main purpose is to help
you in getting trained for the type of questions that you will find in the course
exams.
Discussion Pods
For this semester, due to the challenges associated with collaborative learning
with remote instruction, we will be facilitating an alternate form of discussion. A
reduced number of live, interactive discussion sections will still be led by student
staff. These will be both streamed live, as well as recorded and made available
https:/www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370.20/course/ 4/6


=== PAGE BREAK ===

2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
to all students afterward. In addition, you will be required to attend a one hour-
long “discussion pod” per week with your homework group, which you will
schedule with the course staff and attend on Zoom. This time is intended to be
used to work through the group homework assignment or discuss the course
material. For 15 minutes of this hour, a staff member will join your pod to
facilitate conversation and to answer any questions you have on the material or
assignment. The staff member will not assist with any project debugging during
this time.
We will send out information in the first week of class to facilitate forming
groups and scheduling times for your pod. Attendance is mandatory to receive
full credit for the assignment.
This is a new layout. We may augment, change, or replace this scheme entirely
based on feedback from you and the course staff. We appreciate your flexibility
and patience.
Grading Policy
Final grades will be based on the total points earned on homework, projects and
exams. Factors such as class participation may be used to adjust your final grade,
especially if it falls on a borderline. The grade distribution is as follows:
© Projects (4 assignments, 10% each) = 40%
»* Homework (6 assignments, drop the lowest) = 10%
e Midterm = 25%
e Final exam = 25%
© Optional: 3% of the midterm and final'’s score weight (combined) can be

replaced with participation score (see below)

Participation
You can earn participation points in two ways, depending on whether you are
engaging in the synchronous or asynchronous lectures:

1. Synchronous lectures- Live polling will be conducted during lectures
through Zoom, with your responses recorded. A linear score will be
calculated based on how many polls you respond to. Responding to 2/3 or
more of the polls will garner full points.

2. Asynchronous lectures- Quizzes covering the lecture material will be
administered regularly via Canvas and graded to determine your
participation score. The time windows that you can take these quizzes will
be made available on Canvas

https:/www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370.20/course/ 516


=== PAGE BREAK ===

2020/8/31 EECS 370: Introduction to Computer Organization - Fall 2020
Participation is not required, but if doing so increases your grade, 3% of the
exams’ weight in your overall grade will be replaced with the participation score.
You may choose either method (and switch between them), regardless of which
section you are enrolled in.
COVID-19 Policy
If at any point you become unable to complete your work due to factors related
to the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g. you or a loved one becomes infected or loses
their job, you lose prolonged access to the internet, etc.), please contact the
staff as soon as you can. We will do our best to work with you to find a solution.
If this happens near the start of term, we may encourage you to drop the course.
If it occurs later, we may encourage you to take an “Incomplete” for the term to
finish your work after the semester has ended.
Computers
You may develop on any machine that runs gcc. However, we will only support
programs which run correctly on a CAEN machine. If you are not an engineering
student (or declared CS-major), we recommend you to get a CAEN account. The
autograder should work for submissions from ITCS Linux workstations, but we
cannot guarantee this.
Finally, you are responsible for reading your umich e-mail inbox: class
announcements and other student communications may be sent there.
Home/Announcements Course Overview Lectures Discussions Staff and Hours Resources Video
Review Homeworks Projects Exams Piazza
https:/www.eecs.umich. edu/courses/eecs3 70/eecs370 f20/course/ 6/6
