Instructor: Andrew Owens Winter 2021
Schedule Staff Course info . Piazza Canvas Gradescope Zoom
Tentative schedule
Note: The schedule and syllabus are likely to change significantly over the coming week!
Lecture Date Topic Materials
Lec. 1 Wed, Introduction e Smith & Gasser: Six Lessons from Babies (optional)
Jan 20 = About the course
Unsupervised Learning
Generative models
Lec. 2 Mon, Energy-based models e Song & Kingma: How to Train Your Energy-Based Models
Jan 25 e Grathwohl et al: Your classifier is secretly an energy based model and you should treat it
like one
Lec. 3 Wed, Variational autoencoders — « van den Oord etal.: Neural Discrete Representation Learning
Jan 27 e Vahdat & Kautz, NVAE: A Deep Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder
Lec. 4 Mon, Normalizing flows
Feb 1
Lec. 5 Wed, GANs e Large Scale Adversarial Representation Learning
Feb 3
Lec. 6 Mon, Autoregressive models e Pixel-CNN
Feb 8 e Generative pretraining from pixels
Discriminative methods
Lec. 7 Wed, Pretext tasks e Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning by Context Prediction
Feb 10 e Unsupervised Representation Learning By Predicting Image Rotations
e Colorful Image Colorization
Lec. 8 Mon, Contrastive learning e Representation Learning with Contrastive Predictive Coding
Feb 15 e He et al.: Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning
e Contrastive Multiview Coding
Learning from non-visual signals
Lec. 9 Wed, Language & vision e Virlex: Learning Visual Representations from Textual Annotations
Feb 17 e Radford et al: Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision
Lec.10 Mon, Sound & vision e Afouras et al.: Self-Supervised Learning Of Audio-Visual Objects From Video
Feb 22 e Asano, Patrick et al.: Labelling unlabelled videos from scratch with multi-modal self-
supervision
Video
Lec. 11 Mon, Motion estimation e Jabri et al.: Space-Time Correspondence as a Contrastive Random Walk
Mar 1 e Jonschkowski et al.: What Matters in Unsupervised Optical Flow
Lec.12 Wed, Forecasting e High Fidelity Video Prediction with Large Stochastic Recurrent Neural Networks
Mar 3 e Oops! Predicting Unintentional Action in Video
Lec.13 Mon, 3D reconstruction e Unsupervised Learning of Probably Symmetric Deformable 3D Objects from Images in the
Mar 8 Wild
e Competitive Collaboration: Joint Unsupervised Learning of Depth, Camera Motion, Optical
Flow and Motion Segmentation
Advances in deep learning
Lec.14 Wed, Attention e An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale
Mar 10 e End-to-End Object Detection with Transformers
Lec.15 = Mon, Optimization e Martens & Grosse: K-Fac
Mar 15
Lec.16 Mon, Theory of self-supervision
Mar 22
Learning with less supervision
Lec.17 Wed, Gradient-based meta- e Finn et al.: Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks
Mar 24 learning e Wu, Ren et al.: Understanding Short-Horizon Bias In Stochastic Meta-Optimization
e Maclaurin et al: Gradient-based hyperparameter optimization through reversible learning
(optional)
Lec.18 Mon, More meta-learning * DARTS: Differentiable Architecture Search
Mar 29 e Lorraine et al: Optimizing Millions of Hyperparameters by Implicit Differentiation


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Lecture Date Topic Materials
Lec.19 Wed, Architecture search
Mar 31
Lec.20 Mon, Semi- and weakly- e Self-training with Noisy Student improves ImageNet classification (optional)
Apr 5 supervised learning e Meta Pseudo Labels
e Evaluating Weakly Supervised Object Localization Methods Right
Embodied vision
Lec.21 Wed, Representation learning
Apr 7 for action
Lec.22 Mon, Novelty
Apr 12
Advances in deep learning
Lec.23 Wed, Human vision
Apr 14
Lec. 24 Mon, Project presentations
Apr 19
Lec.25 Wed, Project presentations
Apr 21
Staff & Office Hours
oh
ae = jas
Andrew Owens Xixi Hu
Instructor GSI
Name Office hours time
Andrew Owens Monday 4:45 - 5:30pm (starting Jan 25)
Xixi Hu TBD
Office hours will take place over video chat, using the same Zoom link as lecture.
Course information
Today's computer vision systems largely rely on supervision from humans, such as object labels, to learn about the world.
This course will discuss recent efforts to create methods that avoid the need for this supervision by learning from
unlabeled sensory data. Topics will include: deep generative models, self-supervised learning, multimodal models,
learning from video, and semi-supervised learning. We will also cover recent advances in deep learning, such as meta-
learning and network architectures, that support the goal of unsupervised learning. This is a seminar-based graduate-level
class covering very recent advances in unsupervised learning in computer vision. The main focus of the class will be on
reading and critiquing recent research papers. |n each lecture, students will present and critique several recent research
papers. You will also explore these ideas via a self-directed project. While the class is not intended to be an introduction to
unsupervised learning or deep learning, we will give a single problem set reviewing some of the core concepts, which will
be due approximately 2/3 of the way through the semester.
Lectures: Lectures will take place over Zoom on Monday and Wednesday, 3:00 - 4:30pm. Since this is a discussion-
based class, your affendance is required. Missing more than two classes without an excuse will negatively affect your
grade. Recordings will only be provided to students enrolled in the class.
Prerequisites: This is an advanced vision course. Students are expected to have taken an introductory vision course
before enrolling (EECS 442, 504, or equivalent), so that they will be prepared to read and discuss recent research.
Paper reviews: You'll be required to submit one short paper review each week, beginning the week of Lecture 2. Your
review should be based on the paper itself, rather than the discussion. It is therefore due before the paper is presented in
class (i.e. at 3pm on Monday or Wednesday).
e Summarize the paper. For most papers, this means explaining technical contributions, such as key mathematical
insights, algorithms, and architectures.
e Briefly explain how the paper relates to previous work, and why its contributions might be (or might not be) important.


=== PAGE BREAK ===

e Summarize the key experiments.
e Discuss the paper's shortcomings: e.g. limitations to the methods, unconvincing aspects of experiments, presentation
issues.
Reviews will be graded as: /+, V/, /-, 0. We will not accept late submissions without a valid excuse. However, we will
drop your 2 lowest review scores.
Q&A: This course has a Piazza forum, where you can ask public questions. We also appreciate it when you respond to
questions from other students! If you have an important question that you would prefer to discuss over email, you may
email the course staff (eecs442-fa20-staff@umich.edu), or you can contact the instructor by email directly.
Textbooks: In this class, we'll mostly be reading research papers, rather than textbooks. The following might be useful as
reference, though:
e Goodfellow, Bengio, Courville. Deep Learning. (available for free online)
e Szeliski. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 2nd edition draft (available for free online)
If you have feedback for the author of the Szeliski book draft, please submit it here, and we'll pass it along!
Grading: Final grades will be computed as follows:
Final project 45%
Class presentation 25%
Problem set 20%
Participation & reviews 10%
Academic integrity: While you are encouraged to discuss homework assignment with other students, your programming
work must be completed individually. You must also write up your solution on your own. You may not search for solutions
online, or use existing implementations of the algorithms. Please see the Michigan engineering honor code for more
information.
Support: The counseling and psychological services center (CAPS) provides support for a variety of issues, including
mental health and stress.
Presentation guidelines
You will be in charge of teaching one class, as part of a group of 3 people (starting Lec. 5). Each class will be organized
around a topic of ongoing research. We'll send up a sign-up sheet after the first class, where you will rank
Organization: We suggest organizing most classes as follows:
1. Background (25 mins)
2. Paper 1 (25 mins)
3. Paper 2 (25 mins)
4. Discussion (5 mins)
The background section is usually the most important part of the class. It should resemble a mini-lecture, covering the
"basics" that students will need to understand the paper presentations. For example, if the class is covering papers about
variational autoencoders (VAEs), this section should review what a VAE is, and it should touch on any relevant findings
that are necessary to understand the papers. Often, this will involve also describing prior attempts to solve the problems
that the (much more recent) papers address.
Each paper section should be a critical presentation the work in the paper. You should explain what problem the
researchers were addressing, their motivation for what their solution was, and how well they succeeded at that goal.
Unlike introductory courses, where methods are largely well-understood and have passed the "test of time”, the papers in
this class will often have important limitations. We therefore encourage you to take a critical approach to reading the
papers, and to describe possible shortcomings. We also encourage you to discuss things in the paper that you do not
think were well-justified, and choices by the authors that you did not understand.
Finally, for the (optional) discussion, you will lead a brief interactive session, where students can debate the issues at
stake in the papers. For example, you might run a Q&A session where you ask: should we really consider langquage-
based supervision to be "unsupervised", or do we need to interact with the world to learn good representations ?. |f you'd
like the section to be particularly interactive, you can also do this using Zoom breakout sessions.
Slides: You are allowed to use existing slides and figures, but please clearly credit the authors. Please submit your slides
to us in PDF form. By default, we will post your slides only on Canvas, so that they are only visible to those enrolled in the
class. Howeve, we'd also be happy to post them publicly if you'd like.
Signing up: We'll assign people to presentation timeslots in two phases (i.e. the first and second halves of the class).
You'll fill out a questionaire indicating which classes you'd like to participate in. If you happen to have a group of 3 in mind
already, please indicate this on the form, and we will try to assign you to a single topic (we unfortunately cannot
accommodate groups with other sizes).


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Project guidelines

You'll do a self-directed group project, due at the very end of the course. Groups should be at most 4 students, unless you
are given permission from the instructor. Deliverables include:

e Project proposal (due halfway through the semester).

e Report (4 pages in CVPR format)

e Presentation (a 5-min talk)
We'll provide more details as the semester progresses.

© 2020 The University of Michigan. Website based on a template from HTMLS Up.
