° ogee °
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
Course Links and Information
Instructor: Joyce Chai (chaijy@umich.edu)

Lecture Time: Tuesday and Thursday 10:30-12:00
Lecture Location: https://umich.200m.us///9932414410
GSls: Ziyan Wang (ziywang@umich.edu), Qiucheng Wu (wugiuche@umich.edu)
IA: Zigiao Ma (marstin@umich.edu)
Discussion Sections:
® Sec 1: Friday 11:30- 12:30 (https://umich.zo0m.us/|/98210265286, Password: 48109)
© Sec 2: Friday 12:30- 13:30 (https://umich.z00m.us/|/98210265286, Password: 48109)
e Sec 3: Friday 13:30 - 14:30 (httos://umich.zoom.us/j/8461991344, Password: OKKfcc)
® Sec 4: Monday 16:00 - 17:00 (https://umich.zoom.us/|/8461991344, Password: OKKfcc)
Office Hours:
e Instructor: Tuesday, 1:30-3:00 pm, EST (httos://umich.2o0m.us/|/9932414410 (Links to an
external site.)
® Ziyan: Wednesday, 9-11 am, EST (https://umich.2zo0m.us/|/94058827122, Password: 970214)
® Qiucheng: Thursday, 1-3 pm, EST (httes://umich.zoom.us/|/8461991344, Password: OKKfcc)
e Zigiao: Monday, 8-10 pm, EST (https://umich.z00m.us/|/971576846 12, Password: martin492)
Course Description
This is an introductory course to artificial intelligence that covers fundamental topics in Al,
including search, reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, and machine learning. The goal
of this course is to provide an overview of the artificial intelligence field. Through lectures,
discussions, and homework assignments, students will learn basic Al concepts and principles and
develop modeling and analytical skills to apply Al for problem-solving. The course will prepare
students to further exploration of Al in both research and application domains.
Textbook
Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd or 4th Edition. Russell & Norvig.
The 4th edition just came out and it's not available at several online places. It's great if you have
the 4th edition. Otherwise, the 3rd edition would work as well. Unless specified otherwise, all the
page numbers and chapter numbers refer to the 3rd edition.
Prerequisite
EECS281 and proficiency in Python programming
(most of the programming assignments will be in Python)
Note: CSE graduate students should enroll in EECS592


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Course Grades
The work in this course consists of four homework assignments and two exams. Each assignment
may include a written portion and a programming portion.

e Homework assignments: 50%

e@ Midterm Exam: 25%

e Final Exam: 25%
The final exam will take place online and on the date/time scheduled by the university. Details will
be provided before the exam.

Assigned date Due date

Homework 1 jan 19 Feb9

Homework 2 Feb 9 Mar 2

Homework 3 Mar 2 Mar 25

Homework 4 Mar 25 Apr 15
Lectures and Discussions
Schedule of Topics and Assignments (Tentative)


=== PAGE BREAK ===

Date Topics Slides Assignments
jan 19 Introduction HW’1 Assigned
jan 21 Intelligent Agent
jan 26 Search
jan 28 Adversarial Search
Feb 2 Constraint Satisfaction
Feb4 Logical Agents
Feb 9 Propositional Logic and Inference HW1 Due HW2 Assigned
Feb 11 First-Order Logic and Inference
Feb 16 Programming in Logic
Feb 18 Knowledge Representation
Feb 23 Planning
Feb 25 Uncertainties
Mar2 Bayesian Network HW2 Due HW3 assigned
Mar4 Bayesian Inference
Mar9 Midterm
Mar 11 Hidden Markov Model
Mar 16 Decision Trees
Mar 18 Concept Learning
Mar 23 Well-being Break (no class)
Mar 25 Perceptron Learning HW3 Due HW4 Assigned
Mar 30 Linear Regress and NN
Apr Deep Learning
Apr6 Decision Analysis
Apr 8 Markov Decision Process
Apr 13 Reinforcement Learning
Apr 15 Game theory and Multiagent Decision HW4 Due
Apr 20 Human-Robot Communication
Lecture Videos
To be Uploaded.
Discussion Videos


=== PAGE BREAK ===

To be Uploaded.
Course Policies
Discussion Sections
Weekly one-hour discussion sections will focus on developing problem-solving skills. These
smaller groups are designed to be interactive; students are expected to participate in the solution
of problems under discussion. Students should attend the same section every week and are
encouraged to bring problems (e.g., based on current assignments) to discuss.
Homework
Homework must be turned in on the date that itis due, by 11:55 pm. The homework must be
submitted electronically using Canvas and Gradescope and we will use the later timestamp to
validate turn-in time. It is your responsibility to ensure that the homework has been uploaded
successfully by the due date. This may include checking a box to verify in accordance with the
honor code policy. Homework that is incorrectly uploaded will be subject to the associated late
penalty. Late homework will be penalized 10% per day (where each day starts at 11:55 pm on the
due day). Homework turned in after three days will not be accepted.
Also, note that any changes you make to the homework already submitted on
Canvas/Gradescope count as a resubmission. If you make any changes to the assignment after
the due date has passed you will be assigned a late penalty based on the number of days that
have passed. For example, if you edit an assignment on March 5th and it was due on March 2nd,
you will be assigned a 30% penalty (10% per day) as explained above.
Office Hours
The instructors will have regularly scheduled office hours each week. You are encouraged to
make use of these to discuss aspects of the course including lecture material and homework
problems. In cases where you cannot make office hours, contact the course staff to arrange an
appointment.
Piazza
We have enabled Piazza to facilitate collaborative problem solving between students. It does not
serve as constant on-demand access to course instructors. If you have pressing concerns, make
sure to ask during lectures or office hours. Do not post homework solutions on Piazza.
Academic Honesty
Honor code
All homework submitted must be your own work. Review the College of Engineering's Honor
Code here: http:/Awww.engin.umich.edu/college/academics/bulletin/rules (Links to an external
site.)
In this class, as in many others at the University, you will be expected to include and sign the
Honor Pledge on each assignment you submit. The Honor Pledge is as follows:
| have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this assignment, nor have | concealed any
violations of the Honor Code.
The Honor Code is based on these tenets:

1, Engineers must possess personal integrity both as students and as professionals. They must

be honorable people to ensure safety, health, fairness, and the proper use of available


=== PAGE BREAK ===

resources in their undertakings.
2. Students in the College of Engineering community are honorable and trustworthy persons.
3. The students, faculty members, and administrators of the College of Engineering trust each
other to uphold the principles of the Honor Code. They are jointly responsible for
precautions against violations of its policies.
A, Itis dishonorable for students to receive credit for work that is not the result of their own
efforts.
Among other things, the Honor Code forbids plagiarism. To plagiarize is to use another person's
ideas, writings, etc. as one's own, without crediting the other person. Thus, you must credit
information obtained from other sources, including websites, e-mail or other written
communications, conversations, articles, books, etc.
Collaboration
We expect strict adherence to the Engineering Honor Code in all assignments and exams. All
problem sets (homework assignments) are to be completed on your own. You are encouraged to
discuss ideas and techniques broadly with other class members, but all written works, whether in
scrap or final form, are to be generated by you working alone unless otherwise expressly stated in
the homework assignment. You are not allowed to sit together and work out the details of the
problems with anyone. You are not allowed to discuss the problem set with previous class
members, nor anyone else who has significant knowledge of the details of the problem set. Nor
should you compare your written solutions, whether in scrap paper form or your final work
product, to other students (and vice versa). You are also not allowed to possess, look at, use, or in
any way derive advantage from the existence of solutions prepared in prior years, whether these
solutions were former students' work products or copies of solutions that had been made
available by instructors. Violation of this policy is grounds to initiate an action that would be filed
with the Dean's office and would come before the College of Engineering's Honor Council. Ifyou
find any ambiguity about this policy, it is your responsibility to contact the course staff for
clarification.
Special Accommodations
If you have disabilities or medical conditions that require some form of accommodations, please
contact your instructor and the Office of Students with Disabilities at the start of the term so that
arrangements can be made to accommodate you.
Note: The instructor reserves the right to modify course policies and the course calendar
according to the progress and needs of the class.
